---
author: toriocrema
title: Booktok, Philip Roth & Henry Miller
---
A rant, from knives at school to hope by way of starving hyenas.

_Originally posted on Substack on 06/28/2026_

In Philip Roth’s novel American Pastoral, the little girl Meredith, who is about 10 years old at the time, witnesses a Vietnamese monk’s self-immolation on TV. As a result, she’s unable to sleep for several nights and is struck by a wave of sadness and desperation as she tries to rationalize the monk’s actions in her pre-teen brain. She asks her father: “What caused these gentle people to do such a thing?” The father tries to learn about the strife in Vietnam and explain, but Merry still can’t possibly think that her country could push people on the other side of the planet to douse themselves with kerosene and strike a match, then sit there on the sidewalk as flames erupt from their skin with the exact purpose of being filmed, so that those images could reach a care-free family after dinner in their home in the New Jersey countryside. A few years later, at the age of 16, Merry, by now an unstoppable activist  against the war in Vietnam, blows up her hometown’s post office, killing a family friend in the process. Her father is distraught; it’s his turn to lose hours of sleep, wondering what could have conviced is daughter that this extreme act of violence was the best course of action.

---

A few months ago, at a family reunion, my sister told me about how in the high school I had graduated from just 5 years before, there had recently been an incident in which multiple students had brought pocketknives to class, and had been, in her opinion, unjustly punished. She said that the reason the kids brought the knives in the first place was to defend themselves against other kids who sat waiting in the bathrooms with knives of their own to rob them. But once the police got involved, the only youngsters found guilty of owning sharp blades were the ones trying to defend themselves.

My first reaction to this story was disbelief. Knife fights in the bathrooms? Sure, restrooms were barely used for their intended purposes when I was there, but I couldn’t recall anything violent ever happening in there. When I recounted the story to some of my classmates in university, their reaction was similar to mine; they went as far as looking up an article about it because they thought I was joking. And, to be fair, spouting off something unbelievable and oddly specific about something personal, like my hometown, and trying to keep you from the fact that I just lied to you, is absolutely in the realm of jokes I consider hilarious. But none of it was a joke, far from it. What encourages teenagers to bring a knife to school to rob their classmates, and what makes them think that responding with another knife is the right answer? What’s the Vietnamese monk self-immolation equivalent today? And why robbery instead of screaming at a megaphone or setting a trash can on fire or hurling stones at storefront windows?

I believe you don’t have to look too hard to find a plausible answer to my first question. Just watch the news, as Merry did, or more likely, scroll a little too far in your Instagram feed past the point where the algorithm starts showing you those popular posts with absurd images and even more incredible captions. I’ve seen those myself; the charred bodies of Palestinian kids, endless ruins, and miles of fiber optic cables laid across cities that transport murderous commands to drones. Most of the posts and articles don’t seem interested in explaining those events, and the ones that do either give you a specific date from a few years ago, you can ignore those, or they tap into historical political events that predate the world wars, and despite being the only way to understand our current situation, I fear the kids attending high school today won’t feel the need or desire to read them. Reading is simply not on the modern teenager’s agenda; right-wing politicians and manosphere influencers have made sure of that. Understanding other people is a skill beyond the reach of even the wisest hermits and the most active socialites. That’s one of the points Roth makes in his novel about Merry and her father, but how are you supposed to know that if you don’t read, because being seen in public with a book in your hands is the basis for a trend that, at its core, does nothing more than give us a way to make fun of strangers and portray reading as strictly feminine?

Yeah, I said it, literature could have convinced those kids not to bring a knife to school. Literature goes beyond weekly vlogs about your recent reads and pickups at the local bookstore, or recording your reaction to that part of the latest booktok sensation. I realize I’m definitely coming off as annoying and pretentious here, maybe even a little misogynistic, given the fact that most of the reading community on social media is female. But again, that gender divide is artificial, and like the concept of gender itself, it was crafted, it was devised in a high-tech lab with pipettes and chemical formulas. And I’m not mad at influencers for trying to find optimal ways to raise engagement. If the “10 novels to read if you like X” format is the only way to get people to read, then so be it. But is it extreme to say that beginning to brainstorm for your script by thinking of ways to min-max views is not the best way to get people excited about a book? “X, the perfect novel for fans of Y and Z”, sure, that’s true, but I could have looked that up myself, or asked my LLM of choice to give me a list of similar books; they’re really good at that, dotted lists.

Fuck dotted lists, to hell with the top-10 style videos we’ve been dragging along since 2016. I don’t want to know why I should read this or that book next, I want to know why _you_ liked it. I’m aware of my tastes, and I don’t want to be told what my next purchase should be based on the previous one. Don’t tell me how popular a book is, but tell me if you deem that book worthy of its popularity. Where did you find it? Did it capture your attention from the bookstore window while you were walking home after work? How many joggers ran past you that evening in their neon colored outfits? Did you read it because you thought you would like it, or were you in the mood for a hate read, and in either case, why? I haven’t found any creator that does this exactly, but some get close, like [Below the Fray](https://belowthefray.substack.com/) here on Substack, or [Swift Busboy Maneuvers](https://www.youtube.com/@swiftbusboymaneuvers), who you might have seen sitting in his bathtub with a book in one hand and a microphone in the other.

---

I ended up talking about booktalk influencers, so let’s get back on track. The second question: if the violent outbursts are the result of the kids’ environment, why focus on each other instead? The high school kids we’re talking about used to be considered terrorists in the 60s, their enemy was the imperialist government and all its limbs. They realized their parents’ world was not fit for them and set out to change it. Of course, some kids do get radicalized, much like Merry, towards both sides of the political spectrum, despite the colossal effort to eradicate political topics from schools today. But it seems to me that there’s a portion of people who no longer tackle the political issue in the same way they would have 60 years ago, and the reason for that might be the result of the Merrys of the 60s.

What happened during those 60 years? What historical event could have been so dramatic and substantial as to have changed the view on politics of so many people? The fall of the soviet union? Maybe 9-11? Was seeing the recordings of those events on TV enough to convince people that their input wasn’t needed? If anything, it should have had the opposite effect, and people did march on the streets against the war in Afghanistan, for a bit. I’m going to use another literary reference here, this time from Henry Miller’s _Tropic of Cancer_, if you can believe that. In the first pages of this semi-autobiographical novel, Henry writes:

> _There is only one thing which interests me vitally now, and that is the recording of all that which is omitted in books. Nobody, so far as I can see, is making use of those elements in the air which gives direction and motivation to our lives. Only the killers seem to be extracting from life some satisfactory measure of what they are putting into it. The age demands violence, but we are getting only abortive explosions. Revolutions are nipped in the bud, or else succeed too quickly. Passion is quickly exhausted. Men fall back on ideas, comme d’habitude. Nothing is proposed that can last more than twenty-four hours. We are living a million lives in the space of a generation. In the study of entomology, or of deep sea life, or cellular activity, we derive more…_

> _The telephone interrupts this thought which I should never have been able to complete. Someone is coming to rent the apartment…_

Forget the 60s, these words were written almost a hundred years ago, but if I hadn’t told you where I got them from, would you have been able to tell they were so old? “_The age demands violence, but we are getting only abortive explosions_”. You can’t tell me that line doesn’t raise the hair on your arms and nape, while you trace a direct line to recent events. “_Revolutions are nipped in the bud, or else succeed too quickly. Passion is quickly exhausted. Men fall back on ideas…_” People have been reading this every decade since its publication in 1934, and their reaction couldn’t have been that much different from the next decade’s reader’s. They felt Miller was writing about their time when titanic historical events are happening just out of their finger’s reach. With the sole exception that someone’s train of thought, in one of the almost ten decades, wasn’t interrupted by the telephone, it wasn’t nipped in the bud, but was left to grow and fester. The result is that they understood that the next readers were never going to think the words no longer applied to them. These words would remain relevant forever, and nothing would follow the course of change. And since then, this realization has been passed down from reader to reader, and here I am passing it to you. Maybe that realization wasn’t achieved by a reader at all, but by Miller himself, when not too long after those initial words, he writes:

> _On the meridian of time there is no injustice: there is only the poetry of motion creating the illusion of truth and drama. If at any moment anywhere one comes face to face with the absolute, that great sympathy which makes men like Gautama and Jesus seem divine freezes away; the monstrous thing is not that men have created roses out of this dung heap, but that, for some reason or other, they should want roses. For some reason or other man looks for the miracle, and to accomplish it he will wade through blood. He will debauch himself with ideas, he will reduce himself to a shadow if for only one second of his life he can close his eyes to the hideousness of reality. Everything is endured - disgrace, humiliation, poverty, war, crime, ennui - in the belief that overnight something will occur, a miracle, which will render life tolerable. And all the while a meter is running inside and there is no hand that can reach in there and shut it off. All the while someone is eating the bread of life and drinking the wine, some dirty fat cockroach of a priest who hides away in the cellar guzzling it, while up above in the light of the street a phantom host touches the lips and the blood is pale as water. And out of the endless torment and misery no miracle comes forth, no microscopic vestige of relief. Only ideas, pale, attenuated ideas which have to be fattened by slaughter; ideas which come forth like bile, like the guts of a pig when the carcass is ripped open._

Did those high school kids come to the same conclusion when they witnessed the world around them? Out of the endless torment, all they extracted were attenuated ideas that have to be fattened by slaughter. No wonder then that they decided to bring those knives to school; no wonder kids in other countries escalate to firearms. Their reaction to this hopeless conclusion is different from Henry’s:

> _Somehow the realization that nothing was to be hoped for had a salutary effect upon me. For weeks and months, for years, in fact, all my life I had been looking forward to something happening, some intrinsic event that would alter my life, and now suddenly, inspired by the absolute hopelessness of everything, I felt relieved, felt as though a great burden had been lifted from my shoulders._

There is no relief for those high school kids; they don’t want to live in the racist, bigoted streets of Paris, in rooms covered in lice and mice as Miller did. They don’t want to have alcohol and paid sex as the only things to look forward to after a paycheck. But they have no outlet to make their feelings known. They won’t debauch themselves and wade through blood as Merry did. History taught them that peaceful protest doesn’t work, and authority figures hold the safety and value of private property above their heads like guillotines, so violent protest is out of the question. Is the only option they have to pick up a knife and butcher each other, or can we take a bullet for them? For just once in history, can the current generation make life easier for the next one? Can we change the opinion of the next decade’s reader? So that when they read Henry Miller’s words again:

> _I have found God, but he is insufficient. I am only spiritually dead. Physically I am alive. Morally I am free. The world which I have departed is a menagerie. The dawn is breaking on a new world, a jungle world in which the lean spirits roam with sharp claws. If I am a hyena I am a lean and hungry one: I go forth to fatten myselft._

They’ll know we did not fatten ourselves, but brought the carcass home first. The way towards this goal is blurred and foggy at best. But at least, thanks in part to the literature I have referenced, I’m able to know it’s there. I hope that reading and reflection can do the same for others, so go ahead and pick up a book. It doesn’t have to be from Philip Roth or Henry Miller; you can start from the commercial TikTok slop, and you’ll end up on their milestone along the trail at some point.